Fixed some typos, did some rephrasing, etc. (#87)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/learn-staking.md

Polkadot uses NPoS (Nominated Proof-of-Stake) as its mechanism for selecting the validator set. It is designed with the roles of **validators** and **nominators**, to maximize chain security. Actors who are interested in maintaining the network can run a validator node. At genesis, Polkadot will have a limited amount of slots available for these validators, but this number will grow over time to over one thousand.

> The system encourages DOT holders to participate as nominators. Nominators may back up to 16 validators as trusted validators candidates. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The system encourages DOT holders to participate as nominators. Nominators may back up to 16 validators as trusted validator candidates. 
```

> Validators assume the role of producing new blocks in Babe, validating parachain blocks and coming to finality of the chain. Nominators, in comparison, have the power to choose the set of validators by indicating their support weighted by their DOT holdings. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Validators assume the role of producing new blocks in BABE, validating parachain blocks, and guaranteeing finality. Nominators can choose to back select validators with their stake.
```

> The staking system pays out rewards equally to all validators. Distribution of the rewards are pro-rata to all stakers after the validator payment is deducted. In this way, the network provides incentive to nominate lower-staked validators and furthers ensure decentralization of the validator set.

Reviewer: Could use a link to more documentation where we have examples. This is not intuitive if you are new.
```suggestion
The staking system pays out rewards equally to all validators. Distribution of the rewards are pro-rata to all stakers after the validator payment is deducted. In this way, the network incents the nomination of lower-staked validators to create an equally-staked validator set.
```

Polkadot uses NPoS (Nominated Proof-of-Stake) as its mechanism for selecting the validator set. It is designed with the roles of **validators** and **nominators**, to maximize chain security. Actors who are interested in maintaining the network can run a validator node. At genesis, Polkadot will have a limited amount of slots available for these validators, but this number will grow over time to over one thousand.

> The system also encourages an unlimited number of DOT holders to participate as nominators, where a nominator backs the election of one or more trusted validator candidates (up to 16), to ensure the network will not be heavily centralized on only a few validators. Validators take the role of both validating blocks and guaranteeing the finality of the chain, while nominators will have the power to choose the set of validators by indicating their support weighted by DOTs. Validators earn rewards by completing payable actions in the protocol (for example, producing a new block in BABE), Nominators will get paid relevant to their stake that they have behind a specific validator, with validators having the option to specify an initial portion of the rewards to take for themselves.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The system encourages DOT holders to participate as nominators. Nominators may back up to 16 validators as trusted validators candidates. 

Validators assume the role of producing new blocks in Babe, validating parachain blocks and coming to finality of the chain. Nominators, in comparison, have the power to choose the set of validators by indicating their support weighted by their DOT holdings. 

The staking system pays out rewards equally to all validators. Distribution of the rewards are pro-rata to all stakers after the validator payment is deducted. In this way, the network provides incentive to nominate lower-staked validators and furthers ensure decentralization of the validator set.
```

This is a re-write of this section since I realized while reviewing that it was really unclear.

### 3. Staking Rewards Distribution

> To explain how rewards are paid to validators and nominators, we need to consider **validator pools**, where a validator pool consists of an elected validator together with the nominators backing it. (Note: if a nominator `n` with stake `s` backs several elected validators, say `k`, the NPoS election mechanism will split its stakes into pieces `s_1`, `s_2`, …, `s_k`, so that it backs validator `i` with stake `s_i`. In that case, nominator `n` will be rewarded the same as if there were `k` nominators in different pools, each backing a single validator `i` with stake `s_i`). For each validator pool, we keep a list of nominators with the associated stakes.

Reviewer 2: Just a note: the wiki supports rendering LaTeX in case you ever want to  use it to write math or variables.

Author: Good to know

### 3. Staking Rewards Distribution

To explain how rewards are paid to validators and nominators, we need to consider **validator pools**, where a validator pool consists of an elected validator together with the nominators backing it. (Note: if a nominator `n` with stake `s` backs several elected validators, say `k`, the NPoS election mechanism will split its stakes into pieces `s_1`, `s_2`, …, `s_k`, so that it backs validator `i` with stake `s_i`. In that case, nominator `n` will be rewarded the same as if there were `k` nominators in different pools, each backing a single validator `i` with stake `s_i`). For each validator pool, we keep a list of nominators with the associated stakes.

> The general rule for rewards across validator pools is that two validator pools get paid the **same amount of DOTs** for equal work, i.e. they are NOT paid proportional to the stakes in each pool. Within a validator pool, a (configurable) part of the reward goes to pay the validator's commission fees, and the remainder is paid **pro-rata** (i.e. proportional to stake) to the nominators and validator. Notice in particular that the validator is rewarded twice: once as commission fees for validating, and once for nominating itself with stake.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The general rule for rewards across validator pools is that two validator pools get paid the **same amount of DOTs** for equal work, i.e. they are NOT paid proportional to the stakes in each pool. Within a validator pool, a (configurable) part of the reward goes to pay the validator's commission fees and the remainder is paid **pro-rata** (i.e. proportional to stake) to the nominators and validator. Notice in particular that the validator is rewarded twice: once as commission fees for validating, and once for nominating itself with stake.
```

## Accounts

There are two different accounts for managing your funds: `Stash` and `Controller`.

![staking](assets/NPoS/staking-keys_stash_controller.png)

* **Stash:** This account holds funds bonded for staking, but delegates some functions to a Controller. As a result, you may actively participate with a Stash key kept in a cold wallet, meaning it stays offline all the time. You can also designate a Proxy account to vote in [governance](./learn-governance) proposals.
* **Controller** This account acts on behalf of the Stash account, signalling decisions about nominating and validating. It set preferences like payout account and commission. If you are a validator, it also sets your [session keys](learn-keys#session-keys). It only needs enough funds to pay transaction fees.

We designed this hierarchy of separate key types so that validator operators and nominators can protect themselves much better than in systems with only one key. As a rule, you lose security anytime you use one key for multiple roles, or even if you use keys related by derivation. You should never use any account key for a "hot" session key in particular.

> Any account key (controller or stash) could be either Sr25519 or Ed25519. At present, Polkadot session keys include one Sr25519 and several Ed25519 keys, but we shall add BLS12-381 and a zero-knowledge VRF mechanism, and parachains might employ other session key types.

Reviewer: This is actually not true. It's one ed25519 and three sr25519. We already provided a link to Session keys 2 paragraphs up and our "learn keys" 1 paragraph down. I really think this is not the place to talk about this. Actually, you could probably take this suggestion and the next line and just make them one paragraph to close this section. As in, 

"Controller and Stash account keys can be either sr25519 or ed25519. For more on how keys are used in Polkadot and the cryptography behind it [see here](learn-keys)."
```suggestion
Controller and Stash account keys can be either sr25519 or ed25519.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Controller and Stash account keys can be either sr25519 or ed25519. For more on how keys are used in Polkadot and the cryptography behind it [see here](learn-keys).
```

## Accounts

> There are two different accounts for managing your funds: `Stash` and `Controller`. The latter sets your [Session keys](learn-keys#session-keys).

Reviewer: Nominators don't set Session keys.
```suggestion
There are two different accounts for managing your funds: `Stash` and `Controller`.
```

> ![staking](assets/NPoS/staking-keys_new.png)

Reviewer: Would remove the Session altogether and just do something like this:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/25483142/67389036-15249b00-f59a-11e9-810c-2b83d231c755.png)

> * **Stash:** This account holds funds bonded for participation, but delegates its staking and governance functions to controller and proxy keys. As a result, you may actively participate with a stash key kept in a cold wallet, meaning it stays offline all the time. After unbonding, users must wait a certain amount of time in order to access the locked funds (600 blocks at the time of writing).

Reviewer: - The unbonding period isn't really part of the definition of a Stash and should be covered elsewhere.
- Proxy is unrelated to staking but we should mention it and link (please verify my link works).
```suggestion
* **Stash:** This account holds funds bonded for staking, but delegates some functions to a Controller. As a result, you may actively participate with a Stash key kept in a cold wallet, meaning it stays offline all the time. You can also designate a Proxy account to vote in [governance](./learn-governance) proposals.
```

> * **Controller** This account acts on behalf of the stash account, signalling decisions about nominating and validating. It also sets validator preferences like [session keys](learn-keys#session-keys), payout account, and commission. It only needs enough funds to pay transaction fees.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Controller** This account acts on behalf of the Stash account, signalling decisions about nominating and validating. It set preferences like payout account and commission. If you are a validator, it also sets your [session keys](learn-keys#session-keys). It only needs enough funds to pay transaction fees.
```

> * **Proxy** This account participates in governance on behalf of its stash account. Again, it only needs enough funds to post vote transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * **Proxy** This account participates in governance on behalf of its stash account. Again, it only needs enough funds to post vote transactions.

Reviewer: Remove, confusing because we just said there are two accounts.

* [Validator Guide](maintain-guides-how-to-validate) - Become a validator on the Alexander testnet.

## Slashing

Slashing will happen if a validator misbehaves (e.g. always offline, attack the network or running modified software) in the network. They and their nominators will get slashed by losing a percentage of their bonded/staked DOTs.

As validators have more DOTs staked, they will get slashed more, so we encourage nominators to shift their nominations to less popular validators to reduce the possible losses.

Based on Polkadot's latest codebase, the following slashing conditions have been implemented:

### Unresponsiveness

For every session, validators will send an "I'm Online" message to indicate they are online. Failure to send the heartbeat means unresponsiveness. Depending on the repeated offences and how many other validators were offline, slashing will occur. If one-third of all validators are unresponsive, 5% of their bonded DOTs will be slashed.

Here is the formula for calculation:

    Let x = offenders, n = total no. validators

    Min( (3 * (x - 1)) / n, 1) * 0.05

> Validators should have a well-architected network infrastructure to ensure the node is running to reduce the risk of being slashed. A high availability setup is desirable, preferably with backup nodes that kick in **only once the original node is verifiably offline** (to avoid double-signing and being slashed for equivocation - see below), together with proxy nodes to avoid being DDoSed when your validator node's IP address is exposed. A comprehensive guide on secure validator setup is in progress with the draft available [here](https://hackmd.io/QSJlqjZpQBihEU_ojmtR8g).

Reviewer 2: See Bill's comment about the published version of secure validator set-up.

Author: ```suggestion
Validators should have a well-architected network infrastructure to ensure the node is running to reduce the risk of being slashed. A high availability setup is desirable, preferably with backup nodes that kick in **only once the original node is verifiably offline** (to avoid double-signing and being slashed for equivocation - see below), together with proxy nodes to avoid being DDoSed when your validator node's IP address is exposed. A comprehensive guide on secure validator setup is in progress with the draft available [here](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/en/maintain-guides-secure-validator).
```

![staking](assets/NPoS/staking-keys.png)

> * **Stash:** This account holds funds bonded for participation, but delegates its staking and governance functions to controller and proxy keys. As a result, you may actively participate with a stash key kept in a cold wallet, meaning it stays offline all the time, possibly secured by a multi-signature wallet with member keys in different bank vaults. After unbonding, users must wait a certain amount of time in order to access the locked funds (600 blocks at the time of writing).

Reviewer: Why are we even mentioning storing in bank vaults? How you store your private key is not relevant to the protocol nor should we be making recommendations like this.

Author: I kinda agree with this. @lsaether @laboon ?

Reviewer 2: I think the statement is harmless but out of place in the description. I would move it to a FAQ at the bottom of the page, under the heading "What is cold storage?' and make it purely informational (not a recommendation).

Author: ```suggestion
* **Stash:** This account holds funds bonded for participation, but delegates its staking and governance functions to controller and proxy keys. As a result, you may actively participate with a stash key kept in a cold wallet, meaning it stays offline all the time. After unbonding, users must wait a certain amount of time in order to access the locked funds (600 blocks at the time of writing).
```

Author: ```suggestion
* **Stash** This account holds funds bonded for participation, but delegates its staking and governance functions to controller and proxy keys. As a result, you may actively participate with a stash key kept in a cold wallet, meaning it stays offline all the time, possibly secured by a multi-signature wallet with member keys in different bank vaults. After unbonding, users must wait a certain amount of time in order to access the locked funds (600 blocks at the time of writing).
```

> * **Controller** This account controls its stash account's nomination of validator nodes, or authorizes operation of your own validator, switching between validating, nominating and idle. It only needs enough funds to post transactions when actions are taken.

Reviewer: Inconsistent list formatting.

- **Stash:**
- **Controller**

Mind the `:`

```suggestion
* **Controller** This account acts on behalf of the stash account, signalling decisions about nominating and validating. It also sets validator preferences like session keys, payout account, and commission. It only needs enough funds to pay transaction fees.
```

* **Proxy** This account participates in governance on behalf of its stash account. Again, it only needs enough funds to post vote transactions.

> * **Session** Session keys are not account keys, but instead consist of several different key types used by validator nodes for different functions. A validator operator first certifies their session keys with their controller key. We recommend handling session keys using only your node's RPC interface because if session keys exist elsewhere then you might equivocate and be slashed. We still support the legacy `--key` parameter for testnets like Alexander.

Reviewer: Although stated in the first sentence, session keys are not accounts. So maybe they shouldn't be under the "Accounts" section.

Reviewer 2: I agree.

Author: Where then?

Reviewer: I think we could just say in the "Controller" section that this account sets the Session keys and link to the [keys page](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/en/learn-keys#session-keys). The image above should also be updated --> remove BLS, maybe have Stash point to Controller and Proxy. I'd also just remove Session keys, say that the Controller sets the Session keys.

Should also fix this sentence above the image: "There are three different accounts for managing your funds: Stash, Controller and Session accounts."

Reviewer: Thinking further, this page warrants a link to Session keys, but the rest of it is very high level, like how slashing/rewards work, NPoS, nominator vs validator, etc. Session keys are a low level concern for validators when they are deploying their system, but are not at all related to this document, which is "How does staking work and why would I want to do it?"

Author: I propose merging this as is, because the content we're talking about here has been in there for a while now anyway, just so the fixes are in. Then we can do these clarifications in a separate PR.

Reviewer: I see what you're saying but it needs to happen fast. The risk is that it goes on the "later list" and actually never happens. This image above this list has actually caused confusion with wallet implementation teams. Reworking this page should be high on our priority list.

Author: Image and text updated, please check

We designed this hierarchy of separate key types so that validator operators and nominators can protect themselves much better than in systems with only one key. As a rule, you lose security anytime you use one key for multiple roles, or even if you use keys related by derivation. You should never use any account key for a "hot" session key in particular.

> Any account key (stash, controller, proxy, etc.) could be either Sr25519 or Ed25519. At present, Polkadot session keys include one Sr25519 and several Ed25519 keys, but we shall add BLS12-381 and a zero-knowledge VRF mechanism, and parachains might employ other session key types.

Reviewer: Session keys are generic and defined in the runtime. 
```suggestion
The relay chain will support sr25519 and ed25519 for Stash and Controller accounts.
```

Reviewer 2: We should still include this information about which session keys are implemented for which part of the Relaychain. Sr25519 for Babe because VRF, ed25519 for grandpa for X, etc.

I agree that we should separate session keys from account keys.

Author: Can someone PR/suggest this in where you see it fitting best, or should we leave this for after this PR?

Reviewer: https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/en/learn-keys#session-keys

For more on how keys are used in Polkadot and the cryptography behind it [see here](learn-keys).

## Validators and nominators

> Since validator slots will be limited, most of those who wish to stake their DOTs and contribute economic security to the network will be nominators. Validators do most of the heavy lifting, they produce new block candidates in BABE, vote and come to consensus in GRANDPA, validate STF of parachains, and possibly some other responsibilities in regard to data availability. Nominators, on the other hand, do not need to do anything once they have bonded their DOTs. The experience of the nominator is similar to "set it and forget it" while the validator will be doing an actual service for the network by performing the critical operations. For this reason, the validator has certain privileges in regard to the payout of the staking mechanism and will be able to declare its own allocation before the share is divided to nominators.

Reviewer: This is still misleading in that it makes it seem like validators have all this power to set their terms. They do, but it should mention that there is a competitive market for nominations.
```suggestion
Since validator slots will be limited, most of those who wish to stake their DOTs and contribute economic security to the network will be nominators. Validators do most of the heavy lifting: they produce new block candidates in BABE, vote and come to consensus in GRANDPA, validate the STF of parachains, and possibly some other responsibilities regarding data availability and ICMP. Nominators, on the other hand, do not need to do anything once they have bonded their DOTs. The experience of the nominator is similar to "set it and forget it," while the validator will be doing active service for the network by performing the critical operations. For this reason, the validator has certain privileges regarding the payout of the staking mechanism and will be able to declare its own allocation before the share is divided to nominators.
```

![staking](assets/NPoS/article-2.png)

### Want to stake DOTs?

* [Nominator Guide](maintain-guides-how-to-nominate) - Become a nominator on the Alexander testnet.
* [Validator Guide](maintain-guides-how-to-validate) - Become a validator on the Alexander testnet.

## Slashing

> Slashing will happen if a validator misbehaves (e.g. always offline, attack the network or running modified software) in the network. They and their nominators will get slashed by losing a percentage of their bonded/staked DOTs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Slashing will happen if a validator misbehaves (e.g. goes offline, attacks the network, or runs modified software) in the network. They and their nominators will get slashed by losing a percentage of their bonded/staked DOTs.
```

> As validators have more DOTs staked, they will get slashed more, so we encourage nominators to shift their nominations to less popular validators to reduce the possible losses.

Reviewer: This really only applies if you're a huge nominator since slashes are pro-rata. If you are a huge nominator then you should divide your nomination amongst more validators.

Also don't like this "As validators have more DOTs staked" part because it could be read as "Validators have more DOTs than nominators".

Reviewer 2: Agreed, it's confusing as a single sentence.. what is meant is "validator pools with larger total stake backing them will get slashed more harshly than less popular ones, so nominators should shift nominations to the lowest stake val pool they trust"

Reviewer 2: The idea is to discourage oversubscribing on a validator from nominators

Author: ```suggestion
Validator pools with larger total stake backing them will get slashed more harshly than less popular ones, so we encourage nominators to shift their nominations to less popular validators to reduce the possible losses.
```

Based on Polkadot's latest codebase, the following slashing conditions have been implemented:

### Unresponsiveness

For every session, validators will send an "I'm Online" message to indicate they are online. Failure to send the heartbeat means unresponsiveness. Depending on the repeated offences and how many other validators were offline, slashing will occur. If one-third of all validators are unresponsive, 5% of their bonded DOTs will be slashed.

Here is the formula for calculation:

    Let x = offenders, n = total no. validators

    Min( (3 * (x - 1)) / n, 1) * 0.05

Validators should have a well-architected network infrastructure to ensure the node is running to reduce the risk of being slashed. A high availability setup is desirable, preferably with backup nodes that kick in **only once the original node is verifiably offline** (to avoid double-signing and being slashed for equivocation - see below), together with proxy nodes to avoid being DDoSed when your validator node's IP address is exposed. A comprehensive guide on secure validator setup is in progress with the draft available [here](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/en/maintain-guides-secure-validator).

> ### Grandpa Equivocation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### GRANDPA Equivocation
```

> A validator signed two or more votes in the same round on different chains.

Reviewer: Match tense.
```suggestion
A validator signs two or more votes in the same round on different chains.
```

> ### Babe Equivocation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### BABE Equivocation
```

A validator produces two or more blocks on the relay chain in the same time slot.

> Grandpa and Babe equivocation slashing amount is calculated as below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GRANDPA and BABE equivocation slashing penalty is calculated as below:
```

    Let x = offenders, n = total no. validators

    Min( (3 * x / n )^2, 1)

> Validators may run their nodes on multiple machines to make sure they can still perform validation work in case if one of their nodes goes down. It should be noted that if they do not have a good coordination to manage those machines to do signing, the equivocation problem becomes a possibility. Hence, it would be better to have something like KMS (Key Management Server) as a middleware between those machines to coordinate.

Reviewer: We currently don't support remote signing so we shouldn't recommend people to do it.
```suggestion
Validators may run their nodes on multiple machines to make sure they can still perform validation work in case one of their nodes goes down. It should be noted that if they do not have good coordination to manage signing machines, then equivocation is possible.
```

For example, assume reward is 100 DOTs.
A validator may specify `validator_payment = 50 DOTs` and the remaining 50 DOTs would be split between the validator and their nominators based on the portion of stakes they had.

Rewards can be used by the same account (controller) to keep accumulating the rewards or by the stash account (increasing the staked value / not increasing the staked value). Also, it is possible to top-up / withdraw some bonded DOTs without having to un-stake everything.

## Inflation

> Planned to be close to 10% in the first year. This means that each validator will get 1,000 - 2,000 DOTs per month to share with their nominators.

Reviewer 3: Why do you think we should change this from a sentence to a sentence fragment?  I think even better might be:

```suggestion
Inflation is planned to be close to 10% in the first year. This means that each validator will get 1,000 - 2,000 DOTs per month to share with their nominators.
```

Author: Inflation is planned sounds weird to me, just personal preference. Not married to it.

Reviewer 2: > Inflation is _designed_ to target 10%

is usually how I phrase it

Author: Sounds better to me

Author: ```suggestion
Inflation is designed to be close to 10% in the first year. This means that each validator will get 1,000 - 2,000 DOTs per month to share with their nominators.
```

For those who are interested in knowing more about the design of inflation model for the network, please see [here](https://research.web3.foundation/en/latest/polkadot/Token%20Economics/).

## Why stake?

* 10% inflation/year when the network launches
* 50% targeted active staking
* ~20% annual return

## Why not stake?

* Tokens will be locked for about 12 weeks
* Punishment in case of validator found to be misbehaving

## How many validators will Polkadot have?

The plan is to start with somewhere between 50 to 100 open validator positions and open more gradually. The top bound on the number of validators has not been determined yet, but should only be limited by the bandwidth strain of the network due to frequent and voluminous peer-to-peer message passing. The estimate of the number of validators that Polkadot will have at maturity is around 1000.

## Resources

* [How Nominated Proof of Stake will work in Polkadot](https://medium.com/web3foundation/how-nominated-proof-of-stake-will-work-in-polkadot-377d70c6bd43) - Blog post by Web3 Foundation researcher Alfonso Cevallos covering NPoS in Polkadot.

> * [Secure validator setup](https://hackmd.io/QSJlqjZpQBihEU_ojmtR8g)

Reviewer 3: I think this hackmd is out-of-date.  Our latest secure validator setup is here: https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/en/maintain-guides-secure-validator

Author: ```suggestion
* [Secure validator setup](https://wiki.polkadot.network/docs/en/maintain-guides-secure-validator)
```

**Blue line**:  inflation rate

> The above chart shows the inflation model of the network. Depending on the staking participation, the inflation rate will be dynamically changed to incentivize / disincentivize token holders to participate in staking. For instance, inflation would be 10% if 50% of DOTs are staked in the network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above chart shows the inflation model of the network. Depending on the staking participation, the inflation rate will change dynamically to incent / disincent token holders to participate in staking. For instance, inflation would be 10% if 50% of DOTs are staked in the network.
```

> Determining the ideal staking rate is not an easy task as the network requires enough DOTs to be staked to provide the security guarantees, and we want and to avoid illiquidity on the market.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Determining the ideal staking rate is not an easy task as the network requires enough DOTs to be staked to provide the security guarantees and we want and to avoid illiquidity on the market.
```
